Algorithm propagation use cases (#17)
ESA-APEx/apex_documentation: propagation/usecases.md

---
toc: false
---
# Use Cases for APEx EO Service Support

The APEx services are designed to enhance the efficiency, interoperability, and scalability of EO workflows and algorithms. 
Below are several use cases that demonstrate how these services can be applied to support your EO project.

---

## Use Case 1: Transforming existing desktop software into an on-demand, reusable, APEx-compliant service

> ### Problem

Reviewer: Should we specify prerequisites? I mean, it cannot be any random black box desktop software.
We at least need either a complete algorithm description, or source code, or a headless/cli version that works on Linux.

Author: That is indeed a good suggestion! Maybe it is good to add this to the general description of the Algorithm Toolbox Service but reference it in the use case as well. What do you think @martin-boettcher ?

Reviewer 2: What is the purpose of better defining toolbox? What is meant is the data transformation function of a "tool", not the visualisation, but that is rather trivial. On the other hand, do we have to discriminate toolbox from a specific scientific algorithm developed by some project to avoid that the service is abused? I do not think so, ESA can decide case by case as ESA sponsors it. 

"Transforming one or several date transformation functions of an EO toolbox software into an on-demand, reusable, APEx-compliant service", or "... APEx-registered service"

Author: OK, so the suggestion from your side @martin-boettcher is to not provide any constraints on the toolbox requests and evaluate this on a case-by-case basis together with ESA?
Also here we can take a learning approach, where we can add these constraints throughout the activity.

[APEx Algorithm Hosting](hosting.md) service can offer additional support with both the implementation of the guidelines 
and the onboarding process into the APEx Algorithm Catalogue.

### Outcome
The workflow is successfully onboarded into the APEx Algorithm Catalogue, enhancing its visibility and usability within 
the EO community as an APEx-compliant service.

---

## Use Case 4: Transforming a non-openEO based workflow into an APEx-compliant service and onboarding it on the APEx Algorithm Catalogue

### Problem
A project has developed a non-openEO based workflow and seeks to:
* Enable the service for reuse as an on-demand service.
* Make it accessible through the APEx Algorithm Catalogue.

### Examples

*

### Solution
This process requires the workflow developer to select one of the following options:
* If the workflow is not compatible with cloud-based environments and requires a desktop environment for execution, the 
project may consider using the [APEx Toolbox Cloudification](toolboxcloud.md) service. This will ensure that the workflow
is transformed into an APEx-compatible service, enabling its onboarding onto the APEx Algorithm Catalogue through the 

> [APEx Algorithm Hosting](hosting.md) service.

Reviewer: so worst case, the project has to invoke 2 services right?  The positive side to this perhaps being that there's a checkpoint in between?

Author: Indeed to be discussed if this would a good way forward. This would at least make a clear separation of the scope for each service.

---

## Use Case 5: Automating EO Data Processing Pipelines for Large-Scale Data Processing

### Problem
A project is currently testing and validating a data processing pipeline on a limited subset of data and aims to upscale 
this pipeline for production, large-scale data processing.

### Examples

*

### Solution
The [APEx Upscaling Service](upscaling.md) provides tools and support to assist projects in automating and scaling their 
data processing pipelines. A key prerequisite for utilizing this service is that your data processing pipeline must be 
APEx-compliant. The [APEx Interoperability and Compliance Guidelines](../interoperability/algohosting.md) serve as an 
excellent starting point for ensuring your pipeline meets APEx compliance. If your project requires additional assistance 
in making the data processing pipeline APEx-compliant, the [APEx Algorithm Hosting](hosting.md) service is available to 
provide further support.

If your pipeline includes steps that are not compatible with cloud-based environments, you may consider using the 
[APEx Toolbox Cloudification](toolboxcloud.md) service to transform those components into modular APEx-compliant services.

### Outcome

> A comprehensive data processing environment is established for your project, equipped with the necessary tools and support 

Reviewer: not sure if we'll actually establish something like this. It might be more like a service that's available to anyone + the ability to request support for processing strategies.

Author: OK it will be important to rephrase this bit, to set the correct expectations.

# Use Cases for APEx EO Service Support

The APEx services are designed to enhance the efficiency, interoperability, and scalability of EO workflows and
algorithms.
Below are several use cases that demonstrate how these services can be applied to support your EO project.

## Use Case 1: Transforming features of an existing toolbox into an on-demand, APEx-compliant service

### Scenarios

* A project discovered a toolbox to perform EO data processing tasks and wants to integrate a specific set of features
  from this toolbox into an openEO processing graph or use it as a OGC Application Package.

### Solution

The [APEx Toolbox Cloudfication](toolboxcloud.md) service aims to convert a subset of features from an existing toolbox
into
cloud-based services that comply with APEx standards, enabling seamless integration with cloud resources and existing

> platforms. It is important to note that the cloudification efforts focus on the core functions provided by the toolbox

Author: ```suggestion
platforms. It is important to note that the cloudification efforts focus on the data transformation functions provided by the toolbox
```

1. The algorithm is implemented in openEO or made available as an OGC Application Package.
2. The algorithm has not yet been integrated into an openEO or OGC Application Package.

### Examples

* The project has created an openEO processing graph. Executing this workflow takes too long and incurs high execution
  costs, making it unviable for running at the intended scale.
* The project created a new machine learning model in Python that performs inference based on EO data. However, the
  training and/or inference steps take too long, hindering scalability for processing larger areas of interest.

### Solution

The [APEx Algorithm Enhancement](enhancement.md) service offers support to optimize your algorithm through a structured
analysis and improvement process. In the case of scenario 2, the APEx team will also assess whether performance can be
enhanced
by integrating the algorithm into APEx-compliant technologies, such as openEO or OGC Application Package. If so, the
[APEx Algorithm Porting](porting.md) service can be recommended to support the transformation of your algorithm into an
openEO UDP or package it as an
OGC Application Package.

> 

Author: Would it be better to formulate it as this? 

In the case of scenario 2, the APEx team will also assess whether there is an advantage of 
integrating the algorithm into APEx-compliant technologies, such as openEO or OGC Application Package.

If your algorithm has not yet been implemented in an APEx-compliant technology, please refer to the previous use case to
discover how APEx can provide support.
:::

### Examples

* The project has created an openEO UDP or OGC Application Package that calculates a new air quality index and wants to
  share this service with the EO community.
* The project has developed a new machine learning model encapsulated in an openEO UDP or Application Package and wants
  to ensure it runs stably and within a controlled cost range.
* The project has developed an OGC Application Package and is seeking support to host it on an APEx-compliant platform.

### Solution

The [APEx Algorithm Onboarding](onboarding.md) service offers comprehensive support for integrating your algorithm into
the APEx Algorithm Catalogue, ensuring its availability for reuse within the EO community. The service includes:

* Assistance in selecting an APEx-compliant algorithm hosting platform to guarantee that your algorithm is available for
  execution.
* Provision of tools for automated testing and benchmarking of your algorithm.
* Support and resources for registering your algorithm in the APEx Algorithm Catalogue.

> 

Reviewer 2: I thought that only algorithms deployed on some platform are entitled for entering the APEx catalogue. The solution drops the step of finding a platform, making an agreement with the platform, deploy and test it on the platform. We currently observe how complicated even the initiation of that is on the example of OpenSarToolkit.

Reviewer: I think part of the solution is to separate the description for openEO and AP.
For openEO, we already have a full description online:
https://esa-apex.github.io/apex_documentation/udp_writer_guide.html#sec-udp-integration
It's also not at all a very hard thing to do, because the provider starts from something that is already running on a hosting platform.
The equivalent to openEO is an OGC API Process available via REST API, so that can be treated in a similar manner.

Deploying an OGC AP on a hosting platform, and thus setting up an OGC Process is perhaps a step that either requires a separate service from APEx or the hosting platforms. My personal understanding was always that this is a very normal and easy thing, supported by the ADES rest api, but this might be wrong. (Why is it so difficult actually?)

Author: As it is described right now, deploying of the OGC AP on a hosting platform (section: Hosting Platform Onboarding Support) is part of the onboarding service. However, for an openEO UDP, this step is not relevant. If we agree to support this step, mostly from an OGC AP point of view, we indeed need to align this text so the first bullet point includes the actual onboarding or hosting of the algorithm.

### Outcome

The algorithm is available in the APEx Algorithm Catalogue, enhancing its visibility and usability within
the EO community as an APEx-compliant service.

> ## Use Case 5: Automating EO Data Processing Pipelines for Large-Scale Data Processing

Reviewer: I suggest to not introduce 'pipeline' in our vocabulary, because it's not a well-defined term.
APEx is about on-demand services, and the upscaling service is very much based on them.
Other sorts of 'EO pipelines' for sure exist, but we don't provide tooling to upscale them. (Projects that wish to interact at the level of docker containers for instance can just go ahead and do that with off the shelve open source tools.)

```suggestion
## Use Case 5: Generating large scale maps or results based on on-demand EO services
```

### Scenarios

> * A project is currently testing and validating an openEO or OGC Application Package based data processing pipeline on a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A project is currently testing and validating an openEO or OGC API Processes based web service on a
```

  limited subset of data and aims to upscale this pipeline for production and large-scale data processing.

:::{.callout-tip}

> # Is your pipeline not yet implemented in openEO or packaged as an OGC Application Package?

Reviewer: OGC application package => misleading, it needs to be available and deployed as a process before we can scale up.
```suggestion
# Is your on-demand service not yet implemented in openEO or OGC API Process?
```

APEx provides a set of initial [guidelines](../interoperability/algohosting.md) and
online [resources](index.qmd#how-to-build-an-on-demand-service) to help you get started. If your project requires
additional assistance in making the data processing pipeline APEx-compliant, the [APEx Algorithm Porting](porting.md)
service is available to provide further support.
:::

### Examples

* The project has developed an openEO processing graph or OGC Application Package-based workflow to generate a new air
  quality index. So far, the testing and validation of this workflow have been carried out over a limited geographical
  area, and the project now aims to generate the index at the country level.
* The project has discovered an algorithm in the APEx Algorithm Catalogue for generating a new air quality index and
  aims to execute this algorithm on all historical data for the entire continent of Europe.

### Solution

The [APEx Upscaling Service](upscaling.md) offers tools and support to assist projects in automating and scaling their
data processing pipelines.
These tool may include:

* **Project-Specific Workspace**

>   <br/>A dedicated workspace for managing and monitoring your processing pipelines.

Reviewer: This is again a very broad and vague statement, I propose to be more concrete, like:
```suggestion
  <br/>A Jupyterlab environment allowing to start and monitor long-running jobs.
```

* **Intelligent Job Distribution Tools**

>   <br/>Automated tools for distributing and tracking processing jobs efficiently

Reviewer: distributing jobs is not yet part of the package
I would stick to 'job management'.

Author: ```suggestion
  <br/>Tools for manageing multiple job executions.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <br/>Tools for managing multiple job executions.
```

### Outcome

> A comprehensive data processing environment is established for your project, equipped with the necessary tools and
> support for scaling your EO data processing pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You receive support and tools that enable you to start processing,
monitor progress, and successfully generate large area deliverables.
```
